Reaugmentation documentation (#16606)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/reaugmentation.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Reaugment a Quarkus Application

include::./attributes.adoc[]

== What is augmentation?

> During augmentation the application is initialized - or let's say pre-initialized.

Reviewer: This may sound more complicated but also perhaps more accurate?

Quarkus application configuration may include two types of configuration options: build time options, that are handled during the application build time, and runtime options that may be adjusted after the application has been build but before it's been launched.
The augmentation is a phase of an application build process during which the byte code of the application is optimized according to the application build time configuration.

> Things that used to happen when an EAR file was deployed on a Jakarta-EE server such as parsing static configuration, creating proxy instances, etc. now happen at augmentation time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initialization steps that used to happen when an EAR file was deployed on a Jakarta-EE server such as parsing static configuration, creating proxy instances, etc. now happen at augmentation time.
```

> If you add CDI beans after augmentation they won't work (because of the missing proxy classes) and if you change build-time properties (e.g. `quarkus.datasource.db-kind`) after augmentation these changes will be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CDI beans added after augmentation won't work (because of the missing proxy classes) as well as build-time properties (e.g. `quarkus.datasource.db-kind`) changed after augmentation will be ignored.
```

Build-time properties are marked with a lock in the list of link:all-config[All Configuration Options].
It doesn't matter if you use profiles or any other way to override the properties.
The build-time properties that were active during augmentation are baked into the build.

> Reaugmentation allows you to recreate the augmentation output for a different build configuration

== When is reaugmentation useful?

> Reaugmentation is useful if you ship your software to multiple users which want to be able to change some build-time properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reaugmentation is useful in case the users of your application may want to be able to change some of its build-time properties.
```

For instance changing the database driver or switching features on or off (e.g. jaeger).

> If there are only two or three possible settings, you can easily provide multiple builds. But if the possible combinations get more you probably prefer shipping a mutable jar (the number of combinations of n switches is 2^n).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are only two or three build-time properties that depend on the user environment, you may consider providing alternative builds of the application. However, in case there are more such properties you may prefer shipping a mutable jar instead and let your users re-augment the application for their environment.
```

However, you won't be able to use native images with the package type `mutable-jar`.
Think of the consequences and what other options you have!

It is not a good idea to do reaugmentation at runtime unless you miss the good old times when starting up a server took several minutes and you could enjoy a cup of coffee until it was ready.

== How to reaugment a Quarkus application

In order to run the augmentation steps you need the deployment-jars of the used Quarkus extensions.
These jars are only present in the mutable-jar distribution. This means that you need to build your application with `quarkus.package.type=mutable-jar`.
The `mutable-jar` distribution is the same as the `fast-jar` distribution, except for the additional folder `quarkus-app/lib/deployment`
which contains the deployment-jars and their dependencies (and some class-loader configuration).

TIP: By default, you'll get a warning if a built-time property has been changed at runtime.

> You may set the property `quarkus.configuration.build-time-mismatch-at-runtime=fail` to make sure that you run your application does not startup if there is a mismatch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may set the `quarkus.configuration.build-time-mismatch-at-runtime=fail` property to make sure your application does not startup if there is a mismatch.
```

> However, as of this writing changing `quarkus.datasource.db-kind` at runtime did neither fail nor produce a warning but was silently ignored.

Reviewer: @Sanne just in case, is the above behavior expected?

Reviewer 2: No - I wasn't aware and we should fix it.

Author: I opened issue https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/16786

=== 1. Build your application as mutable-jar

[source,bash]
----
mvn clean install -Dquarkus.package.type=mutable-jar
----

=== 2. Reaugment your application with a different build-time configuration

> In order to reaugment your Quarkus application with different build-time properties, start the application with the desired configuration plus the System Property `quarkus.launch.rebuild` set to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to reaugment your Quarkus application with different build-time properties, start the application with the desired configuration plus the `quarkus.launch.rebuild` system property set to `true`.
```

The following example changes the `quarkus.datasource.db-kind` to `mysql`. For this to work the `mysql-extension` must be included in the build. Augmentation can only switch extension on or off that were present during compile time.

[source,bash]
----
java -jar -Dquarkus.launch.rebuild=true -Dquarkus.datasource.db-kind=mysql target/quarkus-app/quarkus-run.jar
----

NOTE: It does not matter if you use system properties, environment variables, profiles, or an external config file. The current
configuration will be used for augmentation (the content of `quarkus-app/quarkus` will be replaced with the new augmentation output).

> The application will not be started. Quarkus will exit immediately after augmentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The command line above will not launch the application. Quarkus will exit immediately after the application has been re-augmented.
```

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Re-augment a Quarkus Application

include::./attributes.adoc[]

== What is augmentation?

> Quarkus application configuration may include two types of configuration options: build time options, that are handled during the application build time, and runtime options that may be adjusted after the application has been built but before it has been launched.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Quarkus application configuration may include two types of configuration options: 
- Build time options, handled during the application build time;
- Runtime options, that may be adjusted after the application has been built but before it has been launched.
```

The augmentation is a phase of an application build process during which the byte code of the application is optimized according to the application build time configuration.

> Initialization steps that used to happen when an EAR file was deployed on a Jakarta-EE server such as parsing static configuration, creating proxy instances, etc. now happen at augmentation time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Initialization steps that used to happen when an EAR file was deployed on a Jakarta EE server such as parsing static configuration, creating proxy instances, etc. now happen at augmentation time.
```

CDI beans added after augmentation won't work (because of the missing proxy classes) as well as build-time properties (e.g. `quarkus.datasource.db-kind`) changed after augmentation will be ignored.

> Build-time properties are marked with a lock icon (icon:lock[]) in the link:all-config[list of all configuration options].
> It doesn't matter if you use profiles or any other way to override the properties.
> The build-time properties that were active during augmentation are baked into the build.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Build time properties are marked with a lock icon (icon:lock[]) in the link:all-config[list of all configuration options].
It doesn't matter if you use profiles or any other way to override the properties.
The build time properties that were active during augmentation are baked into the build.
```

Don't use hyphen in `build time`

> Re-augmentation is the process of recreating the augmentation output for a different build time configuration

== When is re-augmentation useful?

> Re-augmentation is useful in case the users of your application want to be able to change some of its build-time properties.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Re-augmentation is useful in case the users of your application want to be able to change some of its build time properties.
```

> For instance changing the database driver or switching features on or off (e.g. jaeger).

Reviewer 3: Perhaps a link to the jaeger documentation would be nice here?

> If there are only two or three build-time properties that depend on the user environment, you may consider providing alternative builds of the application. However, in case there are more such properties you may prefer shipping a mutable jar instead and let your users re-augment the application for their environment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If there are only two or three build time properties that depend on the user environment, you may consider providing alternative builds of the application. However, in case there are more such properties you may prefer shipping a mutable jar instead and let your users re-augment the application for their environment.
```

Please notice that you won't be able to use native images with the package type `mutable-jar`.
Think of the consequences and what other options you have!

It is not a good idea to do re-augmentation at runtime unless you miss the good old times when starting up a server took several minutes and you could enjoy a cup of coffee until it was ready.

== How to re-augment a Quarkus application

> In order to run the augmentation steps you need the deployment-jars of the used Quarkus extensions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to run the augmentation steps you need the deployment JARs of the used Quarkus extensions.
```

> These jars are only present in the mutable-jar distribution. This means that you need to build your application with `quarkus.package.type=mutable-jar`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These JARs are only present in the `mutable-jar` distribution. This means that you need to build your application with `quarkus.package.type=mutable-jar`.
```

The `mutable-jar` distribution is the same as the `fast-jar` distribution, except for the additional folder `quarkus-app/lib/deployment`

> which contains the deployment-jars and their dependencies (and some class-loader configuration).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which contains the deployment JARs and their dependencies (and some class-loader configuration).
```

TIP: By default, you'll get a warning if a build time property has been changed at runtime.
You may set the `quarkus.configuration.build-time-mismatch-at-runtime=fail` property to make sure your application does not startup if there is a mismatch.
However, as of this writing changing `quarkus.datasource.db-kind` at runtime did neither fail nor produce a warning but was silently ignored.

> === 1. Build your application as mutable-jar

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== 1. Build your application as `mutable-jar`
```

[source,bash]
----
mvn clean install -Dquarkus.package.type=mutable-jar
----

> === 2. Re-augment your application with a different build-time configuration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== 2. Re-augment your application with a different build time configuration
```

> In order to re-augment your Quarkus application with different build-time properties, start the application with the desired configuration plus the `quarkus.launch.rebuild` system property set to `true`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to re-augment your Quarkus application with different build time properties, start the application with the desired configuration plus the `quarkus.launch.rebuild` system property set to `true`.
```
